# Part 1: System Setup: Uclax Web 1: Windows

[Back to Main](./1.Shared-Start.md)

## Pre Installation: Important Please Read

-   This tutorial covers Windwows 11 which is required for this course. If you are using Windows 10, in theory, as long as you have the latest version of 10 - you should be able to complete this setup. However, this has not been tested and you will have to resolve any differences that are not supported by your Operating System.
-   Make sure your Operating System is up to date
    -   Windows Search > `Check for Updates`
    -   Rinse and repeat until there are no more updates
-   Unlike macOS and Linux (at least out of the box), Windows does not support bash/terminal. In order to get Windows to act more like macOS and Linux, we need to enable Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL).
-   Most of the time, you will want to open up apps as Administrator (e.g. **"Run as Administrator"**). This is called out throughout this setup tutorial
-   I am using Parallels WIndows 11 on MacOS. Its close to a 1:1 Windows, but not 100%. So there may be differences for us to troubleshoot.

## Install Windows WSL, Ubuntu and VS Code

_Note: When you run these installations scripts at some point your computer will restart. Please make sure to save any work and close out of any unlreated applications._

1. Windows Search > **Windows Powershell** - **!Important!** be sure to choose **"Run as Administrator"** on the right
2. type the following command and press enter

    ```powershell
    Set-ExecutionPolicy Bypass -Scope Process -Force; Invoke-WebRequest -Uri "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uclax-teach/uclax-web1-gohman-mitch-2025/refs/heads/master/_course_support/scripts/win11/1.install-windows-apps.ps1" -UseBasicParsing | Invoke-Expression
    ```

3. Install Google Chrome, if you have not already (we will all use this browser to normalize instruction)
4. Once script completes you will be asked to restart your computer. Type "Y" for yes.

## Complete WSL Ubuntu Configuration

1. Windows Search > **Ubuntu** - **!Important!** be sure to choose **"Run as Administrator"** on the right
2. _Note: It may hang at "Installing, this may take a few minutes...". If it takes longer than 3 minutes press "enter" and "control + c"_
3. You will be asked for a username and password - read the note below before entering
    1. Important: when you enter password, it will not show you typing. You have to trust its entering the characters you type
    2. Important: these are up to you, but make sure its something you remember
    3. press enter after each entry
4. Close out of the Ubuntu window

## VS Code and WSL: Add Course Folder and Install WSL Apps

1. Windows Search > **Visual Studio Code** _Note: You may want to pin this app to your taskbar_
2. Click the blue double arrows in bottom left
3. Start typing WSL, and choose the option to `WSL` (or `Connect to WSL`)
4. File > Open Folder
    1. Leave as default, and press "ok" (e.g. /home/username/, where username is the ubuntu username you set up)
    2. trust the authors if prompted
5. View > Terminal
6. Run the following command

    ```bash
    bash -i -c "$(curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uclax-teach/uclax-web1-gohman-mitch-2025/refs/heads/master/_course_support/scripts/win11/2.wsl-bash-install-start.sh)"
    ```

7. If asked, enter your Ubuntu WSL password your set up earlier
8. It will perform a buncha updates, this may take a little bit of time depending on your Internet connection and System
9. When prompted, provide your First, Last and Email (this will be used to set up your folder)
10. Answer any prompts that show up
11. Say YES to making ZSH as your default terminal
12. Run the following command

    ```bash
    bash -i -c "$(curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uclax-teach/uclax-web1-gohman-mitch-2025/refs/heads/master/_course_support/scripts/win11/3.wsl-bash-install-finish.sh)"
    ```

13. Close terminal by clicking trash icon in upper right of terminal

## VS Code and WSL: Setup Course Folder

1. File > Open Folder
    1. Select your your course folder `/home/{username}/**UCLAX-Web1-Lastname-Firstname**`
    2. Press OK
2. Run the following command

    ```bash
    bash -i -c "$(curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/uclax-teach/uclax-web1-gohman-mitch-2025/refs/heads/master/_course_support/scripts/win11/4.wsl-zsh-course-folder.sh)"
    ```

    1. **Windows Firewall**: Choose "Allow" for Node
    2. **VS Code Icons**: Choose Activate
    3. Any other windows or prompts that pop up can be closed/ignored

3. Open app in browser
    1. Control clicking on http://localhost:3999
    2. choose `Google Chrome` and `Always`

## Completion

Ask Instructor to come in and review your setup and answer any questions you may have.

### Troubleshooting

1. Confirm Installations `node -v && npm -v && git -v`
1. Windows Search > **Turn Windows Features on or off**, and make sure the following is enabled
    1. Hyper-V
    2. Virtual Machine Platform
    3. Window Subsystem for Linux
1. Confirm WSL Version 2 > Windows Search > **Windows Powershell** `wsl --list --verbose`
    1. Virtualization Enabled Through BIOS (How old is your computer?) We may have to rely oin WSL 1

[Part 2: Shared Setup](./3.Shared-Github-Setup.md)
